# Methods and Materials
## Phase 1: Comparative Tool Analysis
Tested 5 different Ojibwe translation tools that stated they could translate Anishinaabemowin, the Ojibwe language, with 17 words and 2 complex sentences. The systems tested were AnythingTranslate, Musely.ai, Ojiwechat, Chat GPT Language Supporter, and Claude.ai pro. Researchers used a structured methodology using Excel documentation for consistency of word and grammar input and to validate chat bot responses against respected Anishinaabemowin printed and online dictionaries. Two researchers tested the 5 bots over the course of 3 days, working through the lists at random intervals.
## Phase 2: Guardrail Development
To further test the chatbot systems in speaking and understanding Anishinaabemowin, one researcher carried out short conversations with the systems. In this phase we wanted to test if Chatbots responded to JSON control coding to test their efficacy as educational tools. In this stage the translation tools were dropped from the study as they were not set up for conversations nor were they ever correct in phase 1. Prior to starting conversations JSON guardrail coding was fed into the chatbots that directed them to emulate a kind family or community member and to reply primarily in Anishinaabemowin with English in brackets afterwards.
## Phase 3: Open Conversation Testing
In this phase of testing a researcher had open test conversations with Perplexity, ChatGPT Indigenous Language Bot and Claude.ai. These tests were started "cold" without JSON guardrail coding. Conversations were short and involved moving back and forth between Anishinaabemowin and English. Again we were testing the efficacy of the Chatbots as educational tools for learning the language.
